Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) was a painter, architect, inventor, and student of all things scientific. His natural genius crossed so many disciplines that he epitomized the term Renaissance man. Today he remains best known for his art, including two paintings that remain among the world most famous and admired, Mona Lisa and The Last Supper. Art, da Vinci believed, was indisputably connected with science and nature. Largely self-educated, he filled dozens of secret notebooks with inventions, observations and theories about pursuits from aeronautics to anatomy. But the rest of the world was just beginning to share knowledge in books made with moveable type, and the concepts expressed in his notebooks were often difficult to interpret. As a result, though he was lauded in his time as a great artist, his contemporaries often did not fully appreciate his geniu the combination of intellect and imagination that allowed him to create, at least on paper, such inventions as the bicycle, the helicopter and an airplane based on the physiology and flying capability of a bat.

Leonardo's has been the subject of historical conjecture. Giorgio, the 16th-century biographer of Renaissance painters, tells a story of Leonardo: A local peasant made himself a round shield and requested that Piero have it painted for him. Leonardo, inspired by the story of Medusa, responded a painting of a monster spitting fire that was so terrifying that father bought a different shield to give to the peasant and sold to a Florentine art dealer for 100 ducats, who in turn sold it to the Duke.

Leonardo da Vinci: Early Life and Training
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) was born in Anchiano, Tuscany (now Italy), close to the town of Vinci that provided the surname we associate with him today. In his own time he was known just as Leonardo or as Il Florentine, since he lived near Florence and was famed as an artist, inventor and thinker.

Leonardo is revered for his technological ingenuity. He conceptualized flying machines, armoured fighting vehicle, concentrated solar power, and the double hull. Relatively few of his designs were constructed or even feasible, as the modern scientific approaches to metallurgy and engineering were only in their infancy during Renaissance. Some of his smaller inventions, however, entered the world of manufacturing unheralded, such as automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the strength of wire. He is also sometimes credited with the inventions of the parachute, and tank. He made substantial discoveries in anatomy, civil engineering, geology, and hydrodynamics, but he did not publish findings and they had little to no direct influence on subsequent science.

Leonardo da Vinci: Early Career
Da Vinci received no formal education beyond basic reading, writing and math, but his father appreciated his artistic talent and apprenticed him at around age 15 to the noted sculptor and painter Andrea del Verrocchio, of Florence. For about a decade, da Vinci refined his painting and sculpting techniques and trained in mechanical arts. When he was 20, in 1472, the painters’ guild of Florence offered da Vinci membership, but he remained with Verrocchio until he became an independent master in 1478. Around 1482, he began to paint his first commissioned work, The Adoration of the Magi, for Florence San Donato, a Scopeto monastery.

Leonardo was a contemporary of Botticelli, Ghirlandaio and Perugino, who were all slightly older than he. He may have met them at the workshop of Verrocchio or at the Platonic Academy. Florence was ornamented by the works of artists such as Donatello's contemporaries Masaccio, whose frescoes were imbued with realism and emotion. in one of his notebooks on the formation of rivers, Leonardo's own observations and artworks. Leonardo worked in Milan from 1482 until 1499.

Although he had no formal academic training, many historians regard Leonardo as the prime exemplar of the Renaissance Man or Universal Genius, an individual of curiosity and feverishly inventive imagination. He is widely considered the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived. According to art historian Gardner, the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent, and his mind and personality seem to us superhuman, while the man mysterious and remote. Scholars interpret his view of the world being based in logic, though the empirical methods he used were unorthodox for his time.

However, da Vinci never completed that piece, because shortly thereafter he relocated to Milan to work for the ruling Sforza clan, serving as an engineer, painter, architect, designer of court festivals and, most notably, a sculptor. The family asked da Vinci to create a magnificent 16-foot-tall equestrian statue, in bronze, to honor dynasty founder Francesco Sforza. Da Vinci worked on the project on and off for 12 years, and in 1493 a clay model was ready to display. Imminent war, however, meant repurposing the bronze earmarked for the sculpture into cannons, and the clay model was destroyed in the conflict after the ruling Sforza duke fell from power in 1499.
